---
layout: post
title: "False Equivalency Watch: College and Military Spending"
tags: nytimes "college costs" "false equivalency"
---

A fun thing I'd like to keep up with: The presence of false equivalencies that particularly
rankle me. Today, from [Paul F. Campos](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/05/opinion/sunday/the-real-reason-college-tuition-costs-so-much.html) in the New York Times,
we have this doozy.

> It is disingenuous to call a large increase in public spending a "cut,"
> as some university administrators do, because a huge programmatic expansion
> features somewhat lower per capita subsidies. Suppose that since 1990 the
> government had doubled the number of military bases, while spending slightly
> less per base. A claim that funding for military bases was down, even though
> in fact such funding had nearly doubled, would properly be met with derision.

Yes, Mr. Campos, it would be. Because the point of military spending is to defend the country (or,
more generally, conduct the actions of the United States abroad). This goal does not ever mention
the *number* of people or bases to do that. The correct number of such bases or people is
a matter of policy, experimentation, other generic management processes. But they are not inherenetly
the point.

However, the point of higher education is to educate *individuals*. And thus, per capita spending
decreasing means one of two things: either America's higher education industry has gotten much
more efficient, or it hasn't and we have cut quality. Those are the only two choices as the metric
of success is at the individual level.

Perhaps, indeed, education is subject to [cost disease](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baumol%27s_cost_disease)
(indeed, my top Google search completion for "cost disease" is "cost disease in higher education" so
apparently I'm not the only one saying this). But either way, please recall that when making
claims about how something out to be valued, one must keep in mind the ultimate metric it is
helping fulfill. The military must defend us all. Education helps individuals.

(One can also make various arguments that while perhaps the education of an individual has gone up
in price or stayed approximately the same, the efficiency of education has increased because either
those individuals are receiving a strictly better education or that positive externalities have
increased. These are both interesting points (and again, I'm not the only one making them), but
Mr. Campos wasn't attempting nuance here, so I feel justified in calling him out.)
